In this lecture, you'll learn how to configure VLAN access ports with a lab demo.
So, I've got a simple topology for the lab here.
I've got a single switch, SW1, and I've got a couple of Engineering PCs plugged in there.
ENG1 is plugged into port fastEthernet0/1.
It's got IP address 10.10.10.10, and ENG2 is plugged into fastEthernet0/2 and it's in the
same IP subnet with IP address 10.10.10.11. I also got a Sales PC, SALES3,
which is plugged into fastEthernet0/3, and it's in a different IP subnet with IP address
10.10.20.12.
Right now, I haven't done any configuration on the switch. So, I'll just show you that.
So I'll go on to SW1,
and if I do a 'show interface fast0/1' and then 'switchport' to see VLAN information,
you can see that this is configured as an access port and it's currently in the default VLAN 1.
And if I do a 'show vlan brief', you see that VLAN 1 is actually the only VLAN that is configured
on here and all ports are in VLAN 1.
So now, if I go on to AEngineering PC1, because all PCs are in the same VLAN and ENG2
is also in the same IP subnet,
I should have connectivity. So I'll ping it at 10.10.10.11, and you see that the ping succeeds.
If I try to ping the Sales PC though, which is at 10.10.20.12, this is going
to fail.
They're in the same VLAN at Layer 2, but it's in a different IP subnet at Layer 3,
so I would need a router to be able to route traffic between the two different IP subnets. Now let's look and
see what happens with broadcast traffic.
So I ping 10.10.10.255, which is the broadcast address for the subnet that this
PC is in, I see I get a reply from ENG2 at 10.10.10.11.
If we have a look at the lab topology, that traffic is broadcast isn't just hitting ENG2,
it's also hitting SALES3 as well because it's in the same VLAN. The switches are Layer 2 switches.
It's not Layer 3 aware. It doesn't know anything about different IP subnets, so it's flooding that
broadcast traffic everywhere.
So it's bad for performance and security, that traffic is hitting Sales PC, as well as the Engineering
PCs.
So, that's why we're going to configure our VLANs. So let's
do that now,
so I'll go back onto the switch.
I need to create my VLANs first, so I'll go to global configuration and I will create VLAN.
We were going to use VLAN number 10 for the Engineering subnet and I'm going to give it a name as
well,
'name Eng'. You always want to give your VLANs a name,
so if ever engineers looking at your config later, it's going to be obvious about what you've
configured.
And I'll also configure my Sales VLAN,
we were going to use VLAN 20 for that. So 'vlan 20' and 'name Sales'.
Then, the next thing I'm going to do is I'm going to put my Engineering PC1 into the Engineering
VLAN. I'm not going to put ENG2 in there yet because I want to show you the effect of this.
So, ENG1 PC was on interface fastEthernet0/1.
I'll say 'switchport mode access', to make an access port.
In case you're wondering, the other type of port we can have is a trunk port. I'll cover that in the
next lecture.
So 'switchport mode access' and 'switchport access vlan 10'.
So if you look back at the topology diagram again, ENG1 is in VLAN 10, the other two PCs
are still in the default VLAN 1. If I go onto the command line on ENG1 and I try to ping ENG2
at 10.10.10.11
now, the command is going to fail. They're in the same IP subnet, but they're in different VLANs
at Layer 2,
and the switch does not send traffic between different VLANs.
So, that's why the traffic is failing.
And if I send broadcast traffic, 'ping 10.10.10.10.255', because this PC is the only
thing in VLAN 10, this won't hit anything else at all.
This is good.
This was the point of doing VLANs,
it's to segment our broadcast domains.
The problem is that we want the two PCs to be in the same VLAN though.
Right now, we don't have any connectivity with each other.
So, let's fix that next.
So I'll go back onto the switch configuration, and
ENG2 was on interface fastEthernet 0/2, and I'll use the up arrow to put in the command 'switchport mode access'
and 'switchport access vlan 10'.
If I now go back onto ENG1 again, and if I try pinging the PC at 10.10.10.11 now, then
the ping should succeed.
If this fails, sometimes Packet Tracer will do this.
I'm using Packet Tracer for the Lab Demo, so let's just flap the interface.
So I'll go back onto the switch and I'll do a 'shut' and a 'no shutdown' on interface fastEthernet0/2 to flap it.
Let's just do interface fastEthernet0/1 as well while we're at it.
So 'shut' and 'no shut' on there,
and that should bring it back up again.
So let's try the ping again now, 'ping 10.10.10.11',
and it's probably just taking a minute for the interface to come back up, sinc I did a no 'shut'.
So let's give this a few seconds for the interface to come back, and I'll waffle for a few seconds
until it does. I might need to do another ping here.
So, let's just wait for this one to time out. Okay, let's ping it again, 'ping 10.10.10.11'.
Okay, there we go,
so we got the reply now.
So that's just a quirk in Packet Tracer. In a real world network,
you would not need to 'shutdown' and 'no shut' an interface because you changed the VLAN on it.
Okay, so that's my Engineering PCs with connectivity now.
Next thing to do, let's go back onto the switch and put the Sales PC into the correct
VLAN.
So that was on interface fast0/3, and I'll say 'switchport mode access' and 'switchport
access vlan 20'.
So looking back at the topology again, both my Engineering PCs are in VLAN 10, my Sales PC
is in VLAN 20, so I've completed my configuration.
Everything should be all good now. For verification, we'll go back onto the switch and I'll do a 'show
vlan brief', and you can see there's my Engineering VLAN, VLAN 10, and interfaces fast0/1 and 0/2
are there, and my Sales VLAN 20 is configured with fastEthernet0/3.
All of the other ports I haven't touched yet,
so they are still in the default VLAN 1.
Okay,
so that was how we configure our VLAN access ports, see you in  the next lecture for trunk ports.